Quarkus is a Java framework tailored for deployment on Kubernetes. Key technology components surrounding it are OpenJDK HotSpot and GraalVM. Quarkus aims to make Java a leading platform in Kubernetes and serverless environments while offering developers a unified reactive and imperative programming model to address a wider range of distributed application architectures optimally.

Quarkus offers quick scale-up and high-density use in container orchestration platforms such as Kubernetes. Many more application instances can be run given the same hardware resources. After its initial debut, Quarkus underwent several enhancements over the next few months, culminating in a 1.0.0 release within the open-source community in November 2019.

From the beginning, Quarkus was designed around the container-first and Kubernetes-native philosophy, optimizing for low memory usage and fast startup times. As much processing as possible is done at build time, including taking a closed-world assumption approach to building and running applications. This optimization means that, in most cases, all code that does not have an execution path at runtime isn't loaded into the JVM.

In Quarkus, classes used only at application startup are invoked at build time and not loaded into the runtime JVM. Quarkus also avoids reflection as much as possible, instead favoring static class binding. These design principles reduce the size, and ultimately the memory footprint, of the application running on the JVM while also enabling Quarkus to be natively-native.

Quarkus' design accounted for native compilation from the outset. It was optimized for using the native image capability of GraalVM to compile JVM bytecode to a native machine binary. GraalVM aggressively removes any unreachable code found within the application's source code as well as any of its dependencies. Combined with Linux containers and Kubernetes, a Quarkus application runs as a native Linux executable, eliminating the JVM. A Quarkus native executable starts much faster and uses far less memory than a traditional JVM.

Fast startup, measured in tens of milliseconds, allows automatic scaling up and down of microservices on containers and Kubernetes, as well as FaaS on-the-spot execution. Low memory use helps optimize container density in microservices architecture deployments requiring multiple containers, and results in a smaller application and container image footprint.
